Hello, thanks for joining us. This is the 11th broadcast of the PBC Morning Dawn study group from
Padmasamyaleng in New York, the Venroble-Khenpo Rinpoches retreat and monastery here.
So today we'll be discussing Chapter 11 of the Kenpo Rinpoches book "The Buddhist Path", which is
entitled "Meditation, Posture, and Breath Purification".
So we'll just do brief opening prayers first, and then we'll begin our discussion. Thanks again.
(Music)
Samantavadra, Bhadrasattva, Pramodavadra, Sri-signa, Dhammakara, the 25 king subjects, Sosur, Nuh,
Nyeong, and the 100 Chertans and others, the Lamas of the Kama and the Tamil lineages to you, I
pray.
The supreme tradition of the glorious Buddha Padmasambhava, which is the essential, extraordinary
view and doctrine of the early translation school, you keep alive and spread by the light of wisdom
, Lord of Dharma, great Kenpo, I pray it shall always speak.
In the palace of the old man Dharmadhātud, the essence of all the Buddhas of the three times, the
one who shows clearly the Dharmakāya of my own mind, you pray to the honourable Rūkuru, glorious
Rū teacher, precious one, while laying on the lotus seed and the crown of my head, hold me with
your great kindness and slowly accomplishments of body, speech, and mind.
Om Maravasanādhi, Om Maravasanādhi, Om Maravasanādhi,
Om Maravasanādhi, Om Rūkuru.
So we begin chapter 11 on page 55. This is meditation, posture, and breath purification again. And
I'll just quickly do a brief summary of Rinpoche's teaching in this chapter on the posture section.
So in the beginning, the first paragraph, Rinpoche say that when meditating, it's important to keep
the body, speech, and mind balanced, and that the body has these three components, channels, wind,
and essence element.
And by keeping these three components balanced, then the mind itself will be balanced as well.
Then secondly, when the channels are aligned, then the wind is aligned, and then the mind is
aligned, and we can do this mainly by maintaining a good posture to keep the channels straight.
And Rinpoche's go over the seven point posture of Bhutavaracana, and these are essential
instructions for how to have this straight posture.
So the first instruction is to cross your legs in the lotus or vashra posture.
And second, to keep the back span straight like an arrow pointing up to the sky.
Thirdly, it's about the position of one's hands. Either there can be any equanimity mudra, or you
can rest your hands on your knees with palms down.
Fourthly, to keep the elbows, your elbows rounded without touching them to your sides.
Fifth, to keep the neck straight. Six, to have your eyes looking forward and down towards the tip
of your nose without blinking or moving your eyes too much.
And then seven, to have your tongue touching the roof of your mouth with your lips slightly parted.
So in the chapter there's really specific instructions for each of these points, but this is just
like the bullet points of those.
So then we'll go to this first discussion point.
This is page 55, the first paragraph.
When meditating, it is always important to keep your body, speech, and mind balanced.
The body has three principal components, the channels, the wind, and the essence elements.
If these three components are well balanced, you will feel healthy and comfortable.
First, the channels need to be properly aligned by maintaining good posture.
The main points of good posture are known as the seven-point posture of vudavarachana.
If you use these postures when you meditate, your meditation will be stable and smooth.
I had a question about how they say that the body, speech, and mind are related to the channels,
the wind, and the essence element.
Just wondering what you all think about how speech is related to wind.
What do you think about that?
Here we can definitely see that body, speech, and mind are something that we all share, all
sentient beings.
Body is the grossest, most apparent level.
Mind is the intangible, formless, subtle, most subtle, non-apparent level.
In between is this fluid, flexible, subtle level, which is speech, or wind.
All sentient beings have body, speech, and mind.
Wind is, in one way, what connects the outer to the innermost, or what connects this apparent gross
level phenomena,
what provides the moving energy, and then connects it to this formless, intangible mind.
So then, how speech is related with wind.
I mean, I think there's a lot of instructions, and it's a big topic.
But it's that movement component, and sometimes it's related with circulation in the body, or resp
iration.
They say the breath is like wind, or like the outer wind that we see, like we think of wind in the
air.
And then, similarly, maybe speech is like the air moving in our body, so then we can call it wind.
And also, they say, too, in general, it's a movement of the mind, actually, that gives rise to
speech.
Based on a subtle movement in the mind, that's the wind, actually.
It's the moving.
So all the syllable is actually wind.
That's why they say, I mean, it is a huge big topic, but from the unborn "ah" syllable,
which they say is the basis of all the other syllables, and also represents the nature,
there's like a stirring of movement, or wind, and that, basically, they say,
actually, all speech is the syllables, it's a symbolic movement of syllables that are imbued with
meaning
based upon the subtle movement of wind in the body, through the channels, that's manifest
externally.
So it's really interesting because words, thoughts, concepts are all a stirring of wind in the mind
,
which gives rise to moves through the channels and comes out as a verbal symbolic sound
that has meaning based upon language and all these other things.
So it's like mind, it's like the subtle stirring of mind manifests, that's the, that would be, you
could say,
I mean, if we broke it down into the, again, it's a huge topic, but the central channel would be
the mind,
or the dharmakaya, the white channel, because we saw this in the previous chapter too,
the white channel would be the nirmanakaya, or the channels would be the nirmanakaya,
the white channel would be the nirmanakaya, the red channel would be the subogakaya,
and the blue central channel would be the dharmakaya,
and from the unborn dharmakaya aha syllable comes the manifestation of speech,
which is the more subtle subogakaya form emanating as nirmanakaya, letters and sounds.
So it's really, anyway, I just thought that's what I was actually looking at before we started this
.
It's just interesting, I hadn't thought of it at all that way until you said it,
but thinking about how as the mind moves, like of course, I mean we know our minds are moving in so
many varied ways,
so if we picture the mind as a sphere, and like it's being moved,
and what happens generates different changes in the wind, and then that produces a different sound.
I mean you could say it like a sound, it's almost just like the wind takes different shapes based
on how the mind is moving.
Could you say it that way?
In the channels, like in the previous chapter when we talked about, humans have such a particular
structure of their channels,
and winds and essence elements, that's why we perceive things different from like an ostrich or
something else
that has a different configuration of channels.
But they definitely, like it comes back to this whole balanced point,
like if the channels are balanced, the wind won't be balanced, the wind's not balanced,
the speech won't be balanced, and the mind won't be balanced either.
That's why it's good to start with this more outer level, which is the posture, you know, getting
the proper posture.
I mean they did talk about that a little bit in that last chapter,
getting the right posture really automatically sets things up for the winds to flow more smoothly,
and then because the winds are flowing more smoothly, then the mind will be more settled,
and clear in all the different things that it can be, that aren't disturbed basically.
Or karmic, so they make that in the previous chapter 10, the big distinction between two types of
wind,
karmic wind and wisdom wind.
Another way they talk about it is impure wind that's influenced by our grasping of mind,
or pure wisdom energy or wisdom wind, which is the natural, calm way that our mind functions
and expresses itself when it's really balanced, when it's in it, when it remains in its nature,
then that mind expresses itself with wisdom.
And so it's good just to highlight again that distinction, this karmic wind versus wisdom wind,
because like they move differently depending on if it's a karmic wind or a wisdom wind,
but what about it is different, and it's definitely, like you said, related to what is it moving
through,
the channels, and then where is it coming from, is it coming from, so if we go to the outer,
we see the channels which influence the movement, or if we go more from the inner,
we see our mind, is it really balanced, and thus the expression is really wisdom,
or is it really disturbed or unbalanced, and then the expression is really scattered
and kind of tightened and twisted in various ways that our karmic habitual patterns do and emanate.
I have a question about this. So I think it's good to know about how the posture influences the
channels
and then how that influences the mind.
As a beginning meditator, I don't have any experience of any of that.
So I'm wondering if there's a different way you could think about the posture,
maybe exercising mindfulness, being mindful of what posture you are in,
and then noticing when you lose it and go back into it and engage that process.
I think your question hits on a lot of really special points.
Say we received an instruction from our teacher, and they said, "Sit this way."
But they didn't say anything about why. They just said, "Do this."
This is the way my teacher taught me, and now I'm just going to repeat the thing
because that's what I've learned and it's worked.
So even if we don't know really why it works, there's still a lot of merit
in receiving a particular instruction, a course from these great Realized Masters,
and then just applying it. Even if we have no idea, I haven't even heard anything about
wins or channels or anything like that.
And I think in a lot of comparative traditions, it's like that.
In the beginning, here we are in Chapter 11 of this book,
so the River Chases have already covered quite a bit of ground.
In the beginning, if you were to meet a teacher and they're like,
"Get a big explanation about why you just need to sit on your cushion with a straight back,"
then for a lot of people it would be overwhelming and uninteresting
and probably would cause them to not want to sit that way at all.
It could be.
But here we are kind of little midway through, at least this book,
and so they're kind of filling in a little bit of the "why"
with at least, and this is so subtle, like this is such a subtle level of topic.
I mean, just the way the outer really, how does it really connect with
or interface with the innermost of mind?
But that's just one thing that comes to mind.
Even if we don't know why it works, there's still an instruction that's very practical.
Like you sit this way, cross your legs this way, hold your hands in this way,
straight back, neck, and if we do it, regardless of whether or not we know why
it helps us feel balanced or unbalanced, it will still have that effect.
If it actually is relating to this subtler level,
that actually is influencing the movement on that level.
And that's what I think, in terms of your question,
I think you have a lot of experience with this, actually.
A lot of experience with how posture affects mind states,
like, even for example, working on a computer, or which we all do,
there's the posture, there's the iPhone posture.
That's like, but you know, it's like, if you're working on the computer every day
and you have good posture and you sit up straight and you have more ergonomic,
even though that's slightly different, but you know that at the end of the day,
you'll feel better, you won't have as much prone to aches and pains,
doing that over and over again.
I think it's similar, too, because your channels are more balanced,
and same as, if Kepo Saewong, he said fairly recently,
"Oh, like, for example, if we sit in front of the TV eating, what did he say, Doritos?
We look like a refrigerator."
He said, "If we're doing that, obviously, you know,
like, this is the samadhi of eating chips and watching TV, which we, you know, definitely, we do."
But anyway, how that affects the, you know, that affects one's state of mind,
that affects one's, you know, samadhi.
And just, like, that seems to bring it around to what you asked,
which was, it affects your state of mind, and I mean,
I think for many, most of us, like, sitting eating chips in front of the television,
it's like mindless, you know, there's just a certain level of dullness that's going on there.
The thing for people is relaxing, and it's just some way of, like, it can be fun and relaxing,
but I think in terms of the mind, like, it's just pretty, like, low level, you know.
But so then, paying attention to posture is a great way of being mindful,
and I think it's, like, one of the things that sort of happens automatically,
as, I think, as a beginner, definitely, and I mean, continually, through your own path.
So, I mean, I would think, yes, it's a great way to work on mindfulness,
it's just kind of holding proper posture.
And it's, I think, really directly related to Buddhist teachings on four foundations of mindfulness
.
That's what I was thinking, too.
So we need, if we're having, if we're focusing on something or concentrating on something,
that the outermost one is, of course, phenomena, objects,
and then the little more inner is body, our own body.
Then the little more inner is the physical sensations going in our body.
And then the innermost is our own mind, being mindful of our own mind, our ideas, our thoughts,
emotions.
The easiest thing to focus on is outer objects, which we're all doing all the time,
but not really with much mindfulness, with a lot of grasping, we don't want that, don't want that.
But then if we bring it in more to our body, like you said, it can be an exceptionally profound
meditation technique.
I mean, it was one of the essential techniques that Buddha Shakyamuni taught.
Just over and over again is like a foundational practice for the entire path of liberation,
like that mindfulness of body.
Even if you didn't mention anything about why, in terms of having certain postures,
just literally intentionally placing our posture, or doing gestures, or moving with a certain
awareness
of what am I doing now, staying in the present moment in that way,
then it's an exceptionally profound technique that's very practical, very pragmatic,
and you don't even have to mention anything about this more subtle level,
this more inner tantra level with the winds.
But you don't really miss out on anything in the sense of, if you're sitting as the Buddha
instructed,
and it doesn't give more of the intellectual side in a way of why it works, why it's helpful,
but you actually perform it, you engage it, you practice it, then the benefit's still there.
Because it's so much more profound, which is very clear to say, to actually apply the instruction,
to actually perform it, to meditate, that's what it's all leading towards.
And then if we understand why intellectually, that can be helpful when we get in trouble,
we get confused, or if we want to communicate to someone else,
then it's good to have a clear intellectual understanding.
But like, cooking food is the whole point, and knowing menus and stuff is important,
but to actually cook the food and eat it is the point.
So in this way, it's very practical.
We're taking the medicine.
Yeah.
They say, when you do the mantra of repetition, "Oh, what does this mean? What does that mean?"
They said, "Well, if you take the pill, you know, you don't need to know all the different
ingredients.
It could relieve your allergies, you know.
Even if you don't know what the different ingredients are."
So it is similar. I like that metaphor a lot, because it makes a lot of sense.
It doesn't mean that it's not good or helpful to know exactly how,
but like, for example, one of the seven points is, like, keep the eyes still, you know,
open in a certain way, or focused in one direction.
That's something that there's ancient teachings says so much, you know.
Like, wherever your eye looks, the tendencies are so strong to grab for the mind to follow
where the movement, so it's a movement of the wind that's making everything move anywhere,
like all the movement in your body, too.
And it's connected with the movement of the mind.
So if you're, especially for a beginner, if your mind is, you know,
if your body is moving a lot, then it tends to mean, you know,
if less you have some degree of stability, then your mind is moving a lot, too.
And focused on, like, oh, you know, like, just on those four foundations,
just on the objects instead of, like, the subject.
Especially considering that they say the, you know, like in a previous chapter
when they talked about the channels of the winds and the essence elements in more detail,
how our whole experience is caught up with these things.
We can't really separate us, our sense of, you know, self, in a way,
from the channels and the winds and essence elements, because that's the way we perceive everything
.
Even they say in the previous one, like, the white channel is more associated with appearance.
The red channel is more associated with emptiness.
And then, "wind" is oftentimes, they say, if that had a location, a central channel, wisdom,
wisdom mind would be in a central channel.
So, it's totally related with this.
I mean, even though they don't, in the previous chapter,
Rinpoche has talked more about that.
But like Drachwa was saying, with, like, the karmic habit patterns,
like, oh, the karmic winds, you know,
it's just, like, almost totally overshadowed our wisdom.
Like, our wisdom winds of our actual, you know,
basically the central channel of the, in the heart center, oftentimes they say this.
There's many different ways of seeing the central channel as the nature itself,
as the nature of mind, all these different things.
But everything's dispersed through the other channels,
especially the red and white channels.
So, the breath purification totally helps expel all that karmic dualistic movement
that's continually going through those channels all the time,
and overpowering, completely overpowering the wisdom that's sparking all the time, too.
Because it's just moving throughout the channels, and all the knots,
and the channels are all messed up, and the movements are all duality-minded.
So, by explaining the stale air, like, someone told me a story, too.
They said, when, when Rinpoche's father, Lama, Lama Cune,
I think when he was maybe in the hospital,
but, and he woke up to do practice, like, in the late at night,
and immediately he does this exact breath purification that they say.
And they said they were so surprised because they thought,
"Oh, but that's like, kind of like a beginner technique, or, you know, why, you know, it's not that
big a deal."
But they said he always did that.
And so many great masters, they all do that.
When they wake up in the morning, before they go to sleep, you know, like,
spell the duality winds from the body just exactly like they talked about here, you know.
Because otherwise, you have all this stale duality, you know,
karmic wind that's overshadowing your natural, I mean, wisdom wind, you know.
So, it's such a powerful technique, you know.
And we shouldn't think that it's not important, but we're just, you know, beginners thinking this.
And so, maybe we'll go into this second section on this more breath purification instructions
at Kemmer Rinpoche's game.
And the really brief summary is that Rinpoche say,
"After balancing one's body, the next is to balance the breathing or wind."
And so, during meditation in particular, the instruction is just to breathe normally.
But then they say, "Before beginning your morning practice session,
after doing at least three prostrations and sitting in this correct posture that they describe,
then they ask us to do a breath purification to release the negative karmic winds
related to our three poisons of ignorance, attachment, and anger.
And then also, this helps us to recognize and cultivate this wisdom wind that we have.
And so, the point of the breath purification is that we're clearing out our channels
of all the impure, unbalanced wind energies
so that our natural wisdom mind energy will naturally circulate throughout our body.
And then, we won't go in particular to the exact instructions of it,
because they're really so clear in this chapter.
And we're welcome if there's questions and we talk.
But really, for the exact instructions, just read the chapter. It's the best.
When Rinpoche say that, "Once our channels and winds are more balanced,
then our mind naturally settles more easily, becoming more calm and clear and fresh."
And that these preparations of setting our posture into good, balanced posture,
clearing out the stale, karmic winds,
we're kind of recognizing or activating our wisdom winds,
these are all essential preparations for inviting our own natural intelligence,
our own wisdom to come, to be a part of our practice, to really flourish and activate.
So that essentially is the whole chapter there.
And then, if we read that second topic.
So this is from page 57, the first paragraph, and then also page 58, the last paragraph.
There is a particular Dzogchen technique for breath purification
that releases the inner air of the negative emotions.
The three main emotions, often called the three poisons,
are attachment, anger, and ignorance.
By releasing the air connected with the three poisons, you can clarify your wind energy.
Doing this exercise will help to clear the air of the emotions.
When the emotion air is dispelled, at that moment, wisdom air will appear more clearly.
After doing this exercise to purify the breath,
your mind will be clearer and calmer, and it will be easier to maintain your mind in the meditative
state.
Sounds good. It sounds like we should be doing this breath purification all the time.
I know one thing that I think, that I often forget with this breath purification is that
because so much of the actual movement is to release the negative air,
that sometimes I really forget to bring in the wisdom air too.
So it's not just expelling the stale air,
it's also inviting and literally taking in the wisdom air to fill up our channels with this wisdom
wind.
So Rummuche, Kemurumuche, and Kenshi Paul and Rummuche definitely said very clearly
that about this far around you is to see that this five-colored wisdom wind is in the space around
you
and you literally breathe it in on the inhalation.
And then as you expel, just as they described in this chapter, you expel those karmic winds.
But just to not forget that we're not just cleaning the system,
we're totally rejuvenating, reactivating so that everything is fully presently online and firing
and all that.
And then we can begin the practice with this vibrant, fresh, joyous, uplifted approach.
And literally saying on this subtle level that it is, it is totally rejuvenated like our body, like
our this subtle body too.
And what does that mean?
When we expel all the karmic duality winds, what's left?
Wisdom winds, just like what they say.
And they say, they didn't emphasize so much in here, but you should imagine,
from your whole previous lifetimes, all the anger that you've ever experienced
in all your past lifetimes up until this moment is totally purified in God.
And it's replaced by wisdom, wisdom wind, and the same thing with attachment and the same thing
with ignorance.
But what does that mean?
Our bodies are totally cured, that we're in the wisdom state, that our body is in the wisdom state,
that our mind is in the wisdom state, that our speech is in the wisdom state.
So it's like totally connecting with that like nature right off the bat.
Not like, "I am more and more ordinary me, with all my deluded junk sitting down to do a practice
that's totally separate from that."
It's totally not the view that is actually this technique.
This technique is like you're totally reconnecting with your own whole being of body, speech, and
mind
as a total unity, which even in the Four Empowerments, Guru Yoga, body, speech, mind, unity.
It's like we're totally connecting with that.
And then we're meditating in that whole context so that our whole practice is in that context.
And that way, we'll really develop confidence.
Because that's what we're doing in practice.
That's what the Dzogchen teachings say, and that's what all the teachings say.
To see that, and experience that, and know that, not just like,
"Okay, here we go again. My normal deluded depressed self is going to engage."
No, sit up straight about the posture and adopt a view.
And within that, expel the negative air, the wisdom duality air,
and then do the whole practice in that state.
I mean, I'm talking like I know, but it's such a good thing to remember that that is the view.
That's what we are doing.
And so I have a question.
So these are particular instructions for this formal meditation time.
How we should sit with our body, and how our wind should circulate ideally.
So then, when we get up after a session, and we're not formally meditating,
but we're in this post-meditation, well then how does all this work then?
Because we have these very particular, you have your body in this position because it's ideal for
it,
I think, to circulate well.
And then have your breathing in this particular way, because it's ideal to have your mind be
balanced.
So then when we get up, and walk, and stand, and lie down, and all these other postures,
and we're using our speed, so our wind is not just naturally, it's like kind of using it, you know?
So then how does that fit with this?
So the question is meditation. These are very particular meditation instructions.
So by hearing these instructions, what does it say about how do we practice in post-meditation too?
When we're not in this posture, we're not doing this purification practice right in the,
as we're just talking, or you know, doing our usual daily life things.
And so how do they fit together?
Where you mentioned the four foundations of mindfulness earlier.
That's a, in the Buddha he gave so many teachings on mindfulness as the foundation of all Dhamma
practice.
When you're eating, you're aware that you're eating.
When you take a bite of the apple, you're aware that you're taking a bite of the apple.
When you're speaking, you're aware that you're speaking and what you're saying.
When you're walking, generally they say, whether you're walking, sitting, speaking, or sleeping,
right?
Standing, walking, lying.
Sitting.
And sitting. You're totally aware that you're doing that.
So that's definitely tied in, at least from the foundation of recognizing what you're doing.
Because when we're up and about, we still have these channels and these winds and this mind.
So, whereas it's easier maybe to, when we're, you know, have this formal time set aside,
to just to really cultivate our awareness, our mind, you know.
Because like in a formal meditation session, we set the posture, we set the breathing,
and then just release it, let it be natural.
And then the principle thing we're relating to is the mind, in a way.
But then in a post meditation, oftentimes we're so focused on what is the body doing,
you have to eat, and what am I saying, and these outward things.
So it's not so much focusing on the mind as it is the activities of the mind,
the expressions of the body in the speech.
And here, I think it's really beautiful, in one of these definitions here of post meditation.
I wonder if I should say that.
During formal meditation, we learn how to rest in profound emptiness,
the non-grasping state of non-duality.
And during post meditation, we learn how to continuously work with the richness qualities of mind,
including love, compassion, and wisdom.
This helps us maintain a balance between the absolute and relative aspects of awareness,
enabling us to increasingly discover them both.
So this is really valuable.
Like while this chapter is really highlighting the formal component,
it's not to say this less formal or post meditation isn't important, it's essential.
In a way, it's this more outward, outreaching, relative aspect of the whole practice and of our
mind, you know, of what we are.
And bottom line, if we don't do that, if we can't learn to do that when we're not meditating,
and you practice one hour a day, which is great, that means 23 hours a day you're not practicing at
all.
You know, unless you bring this like you were saying, unless we can learn how to focus on these
things that you just said,
you know, the post meditative state of love, compassion, and mindfulness.
And that's kind of a, I mean, that's kind of a, it's a true statement,
but it's a little daunting, you know, if you think like, if we only think that we're practicing
when we're on the cushion,
we'll never attain enlightenment. You just can't do it, because it's like, one hour of wisdom,
let's say your meditation is 100% perfect, complete wisdom meditation, no duality,
and then the other 23 hours is 100% duality. But anyway, that's not an emphasis on the negative,
it's just to say that like, we are whole beings, you know, we have these components all the time,
so...
I mean, and also just, I mean, this is, that question just makes me think about how through
meditation practice we become,
we're trying to become more familiar with our mind, that's the whole point.
And so then we can see formal meditation practice, definitely so important, I mean, always,
but in the beginning, it really helps us to really even recognize mind, what is mind at all?
What are we talking about when we say mind? And then like, so the more we get this kind of idea of
what that is,
and then post meditation, like automatically, we can start to see like, oh, this is,
what is this mind that's carrying through everything, like whether I'm sitting here or doing all
these other activities,
you know, that that's what we're, we're hopefully like learning to not eventually make a
distinction between them, you know,
that because the mind, the mind is there always, you know.
So anyway, just trying to think about how to link like formal meditation and then post meditation,
and yeah, they're doing different things, but like eventually, it's the same, you know.
Yeah, really training to develop that realization, which is such a high level of realization,
the word meditation and post meditation are the same. It's very, really hot, but yeah.
And I mean, part of that is coming just from thinking about like in this term definition,
just saying that particularly in formal meditation, we're trying to connect with our absolute,
absolute level or absolute nature.
And then in post meditation, it's more the relative level of engaging and like trying to develop
these qualities,
the arising qualities of our mind or expressive qualities of our mind.
But ultimately, again, like that we see that, and they say that all throughout this book,
you know, and so many books and teachings talk about that, like trying to really use to see one and
the other,
to see the relative and the absolute and absolute and the relative.
And so in that way, that's like the bridge, really. It's like bringing formal meditation into post
meditation.
And it does, I think, just happen naturally as you do it more.
But because we're more on the side as we begin and we're more familiar with not meditating
or like not being familiar with our mind, it's really so important in the beginning,
especially for, you know, till we get really stable to be emphasizing, I think, a little more the
formal side.
I mean, that's just what I think.
And if you look at these really exceptional masters like the Kemperimiches and, I mean, so many
other great masters,
that they're just so highly realized and stable in their realization.
And yet they spend so much time in formal meditation and in contemplation,
like studying, investigating, analyzing, at least that's, I think, what we've seen,
have the really fortunate opportunity to see that even if these great masters
that have totally blended in their meditation and post meditation experiences,
they still spend so much time, like the first Kensei Rinpoche or the first Kontrol,
I mean, they spend so much time doing these expressive, outreaching, compassionate activities,
but also on the cushion.
Really, Milarepa's final teaching to Gampoko was to show how calloused his bottom and his legs are.
It's like, if you, in Lama Chiman too, he says it's better to wear out one cushion
than hundreds of pairs of shoes.
I like that.
It's really like formal practice is so important.
These are great masters. These are really his wisdom words, you know?
So, it's good and these may be, like you said, simple techniques.
They may sound simple, but it's because they're profound.
These have been passed down for centuries, thousands of years.
That's why, if they didn't work, people wouldn't gain realization by using them,
but obviously that's not the case, because all the great masters use them.
So, how should we see the relative when we're in post meditation?
This is our final summary point.
How should we see the relative in a post meditation state?
Really, it's an opportunity for bodhisattva activity, in a way, as an illusion.
It's a dreamlike expression.
Nothing we're trying to avoid, nothing we're trying to really...
We're trying not to hold on to it as a substantially existent real thing
that we have to defend against or grab onto.
So, it's constantly in flux, constantly flowing, totally dynamic, just like this is our mind.
This is a reflection of mind.
This is just like a dream experience that's happening in my mind, to try to see it fluidly,
so that the meditation that we have on the cushion really is incorporated into post meditation.
This is just a... I mean, really it is like, that's what they're trying to say.
Meditation isn't just some small technique we apply, just when everything's just right and it's
nice.
But meditation is the approach to try to constantly be actively available to any experience
or anything that might happen, and to try to stay open and fresh and engage it
and not close up and shut down and get defensive and all about me.
I mean, that's the point.
And that's like a seamless blend.
These great masters of meditation and post meditation.
You see everything like a dream, just compassionate.
I mean, I've seen... Yeah, I mean, this is going to be completely...
But Vacheria... I mean, Vacheria is seeing more, not so much as a dream to say,
but this... I mean, this says a lot, but that it's more, it's already pure, it's already totally
complete.
It's not just an illusory dynamic experience, but it's like a 100% pure, perfect display.
A perfect display of the natural inheritance or natural awareness is the source,
the ever-abiding source of all things that are ever happening, you know?
So this is all a dynamic display of enlightened beings and doing enlightened activities.
And where there too is the center, and on their side, they're the center.
And it's all this already perfectly complete celebration of the true nature that we all share.
So it's not just a dream that could be good, could be bad, it's a total, yeah,
total beautiful celebration of the nature that is always perfect.
So in that sense, it's all wisdom, wind, and I mean, there's just so many teachings on all these
things, but...
That's it, practice.
Thanks. We'll just do a very brief silent meditation and then dedicate the merit.
(Singing in foreign language)